README.md, before:

`read_counter` is a tool to count the number of reads (from a fastq file) that map to a set of nucleotide sequences (in a fasta format).

# Table of contents

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Quick usage](#quick-usage)
* [Advance usage](#advance-usage)
    * [Count reads](#count-reads)
    * [Index fasta](#index-fasta)
    * [Merge](#merge)


# Introduction

Count reads that map to a set of genes is not always easy. If the genes are similar to each other, there will be reads that map to multiple genes with the same quality. Moreover, even if reads map to a gene, we would like to be able to filter only the high quality reads.

When working with gene catalog, we also have many genes that map to the same cluster. When counting the reads in this case, we would like to use the clusters as a unit count and not the single genes.

If you need to map reads from a metagenomic sample to a set of genes, you can use `read_counter`.




# Requirements

To run `read_counter` you will need:
The mOTU profiler requires:
* Python 3 (or higher)
* the Burrow-Wheeler Aligner v0.7.15 or higher ([bwa](https://github.com/lh3/bwa))



# Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/AlessioMilanese/read_counter.git
cd read_counter
export PATH=`pwd`:$PATH
```

You can test the installation with:
```
./test.sh
```


# Quick usage

# Advance usage

### Count reads

### Index fasta

The command `read_counter index` does two things:
- First, it will first run `bwa index` internally on the input fasta file,
- Second, it will create a file `<fasta_id>.coords`.

This second file can be modified if you want to add padding or want to group the count of some genes.

`<fasta_id>.coords` is a tab delimited file with no header, and five columns:
1. gene_id (same as in the fasta file, but without the `>`)
2. gene length
3. position of starting of the gene sequence (i.e. where the left padding ends)
4. position of where the gene ends (i.e. where the right padding starts)
5. gene clusters

Regarding the second column, we count the number of bases in the gene.
Example, in black there is the gene sequence (start codon: ATG and stop codon: TAA), and in grey there is the padding.

![example_gene:AGGCATTTTT ATGCGGCAATAA GCGGGCGG](https://github.com/AlessioMilanese/read_counter/blob/master/pics/example_gene.png)

- The gene length (column 2) is 12.
- The position where the gene starts (column 3) is 11, which corresponds to the `A` in `ATG` (if you start to count from 1).
- The position where the gene ends (column 4) is 22, which corresponds to the `A` in `TAA` (if you start to count from 1).

Regarding the last column, it's helpful to specify genes that belong to the same cluster and should be counted together. Example of a `<fasta_id>.coords`:
```
geneA  1494  101  1594  cluster_1
geneB   984  101  1084  cluster_2
geneC  1737  101  1837  cluster_1
geneD  1431  101  1531  cluster_3
```
The reads that map to `geneA` and `geneC` are summed up and printed in the output under the id `cluster_1`.

Note that by default, `read_counter index` will consider the genes to have no padding (i.e. column 3 is `1` and column 4 is equal to the length of the genes). Additionally, the fifth column (with the clusters) will be set equal to the gene ids. If you wish to change the padding or the clustering, you will need to manually change the `<fasta_id>.coords` file.

### Merge

Commit message:

add info about test.sh

README.md, after:

`read_counter` is a tool to count the number of reads (from a fastq file) that map to a set of nucleotide sequences (in a fasta format).

# Table of contents

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Quick usage](#quick-usage)
* [Advance usage](#advance-usage)
    * [Count reads](#count-reads)
    * [Index fasta](#index-fasta)
    * [Merge](#merge)


# Introduction

Count reads that map to a set of genes is not always easy. If the genes are similar to each other, there will be reads that map to multiple genes with the same quality. Moreover, even if reads map to a gene, we would like to be able to filter only the high quality reads.

When working with gene catalog, we also have many genes that map to the same cluster. When counting the reads in this case, we would like to use the clusters as a unit count and not the single genes.

If you need to map reads from a metagenomic sample to a set of genes, you can use `read_counter`.




# Requirements

To run `read_counter` you will need:
The mOTU profiler requires:
* Python 3 (or higher)
* the Burrow-Wheeler Aligner v0.7.15 or higher ([bwa](https://github.com/lh3/bwa))



# Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/AlessioMilanese/read_counter.git
cd read_counter
export PATH=`pwd`:$PATH
```

You can test the installation with:
```
./test.sh
```
If the tool is working correctly, the last two lines will be:
```
RESULT --------------------------------------------------------------
You have the same result as the test
```

# Quick usage

# Advance usage

### Count reads

### Index fasta

The command `read_counter index` does two things:
- First, it will first run `bwa index` internally on the input fasta file,
- Second, it will create a file `<fasta_id>.coords`.

This second file can be modified if you want to add padding or want to group the count of some genes.

`<fasta_id>.coords` is a tab delimited file with no header, and five columns:
1. gene_id (same as in the fasta file, but without the `>`)
2. gene length
3. position of starting of the gene sequence (i.e. where the left padding ends)
4. position of where the gene ends (i.e. where the right padding starts)
5. gene clusters

Regarding the second column, we count the number of bases in the gene.
Example, in black there is the gene sequence (start codon: ATG and stop codon: TAA), and in grey there is the padding.

![example_gene:AGGCATTTTT ATGCGGCAATAA GCGGGCGG](https://github.com/AlessioMilanese/read_counter/blob/master/pics/example_gene.png)

- The gene length (column 2) is 12.
- The position where the gene starts (column 3) is 11, which corresponds to the `A` in `ATG` (if you start to count from 1).
- The position where the gene ends (column 4) is 22, which corresponds to the `A` in `TAA` (if you start to count from 1).

Regarding the last column, it's helpful to specify genes that belong to the same cluster and should be counted together. Example of a `<fasta_id>.coords`:
```
geneA  1494  101  1594  cluster_1
geneB   984  101  1084  cluster_2
geneC  1737  101  1837  cluster_1
geneD  1431  101  1531  cluster_3
```
The reads that map to `geneA` and `geneC` are summed up and printed in the output under the id `cluster_1`.

Note that by default, `read_counter index` will consider the genes to have no padding (i.e. column 3 is `1` and column 4 is equal to the length of the genes). Additionally, the fifth column (with the clusters) will be set equal to the gene ids. If you wish to change the padding or the clustering, you will need to manually change the `<fasta_id>.coords` file.

### Merge
